What is Java?
Java is a high-level, object-oriented programming language developed by Sun Microsystems (now owned by Oracle) in 1995.
It follows the principle “Write Once, Run Anywhere” (WORA) – meaning code compiled in Java can run on any platform with a Java Virtual Machine (JVM).

High-Level Language (HLL)
A high-level language is a programming language that is closer to human language and abstracts away hardware details.

Examples:
Java, Python, C#, JavaScript

Characteristics:
Easy to read, write, and understand.
Portable (can run on different platforms).
Requires a compiler/interpreter to convert into machine code.
Provides features like objects, functions, loops, data structures.

Pros:
✔ Easier to learn and use
✔ Faster development time
✔ Platform-independent (e.g., Java runs on JVM)

Cons:
✘ Slower than low-level (due to abstraction)
✘ Less control over hardware

🔹 Low-Level Language (LLL)
A low-level language is a programming language that is closer to machine code and provides more control over hardware.
Examples:
Assembly Language
Machine Language (binary: 0s and 1s)
Characteristics:
Harder to read and write (complex syntax).
Platform dependent (specific to processor/architecture).
Programs are faster and more memory efficient.
Requires deep hardware knowledge.

Pros:
✔ Very fast execution
✔ Direct control over hardware resources (CPU, memory)

Cons:
✘ Difficult to learn and debug
✘ Not portable (depends on hardware)


Key Features of Java
---------------------
Simple – Easy to learn with a syntax similar to C/C++.

Object-Oriented – Everything is treated as objects (Encapsulation, Inheritance, Polymorphism, Abstraction).

Platform Independent – Runs on JVM, not directly on the OS.

Secure – No direct memory access like C/C++, strong security manager.

Robust – Strong memory management, exception handling, and type checking(Type checking is the process of verifying and enforcing the rules of types (data types) in a program.)

Multithreaded – Supports multitasking with threads.

High Performance – Uses Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler for fast execution.
The JIT compiler boosts Java’s performance by turning frequently used bytecode into optimized machine code on the fly, making Java applications run almost as fast as native applications.
EX: Loops.
Distributed – Supports networking(java.net) and RMI (Remote Method Invocation)(allows an object on one machine to call methods on an object located on another machine, as if it were local.).
	It provides built-in features and APIs that make it easy to build network-based applications where multiple programs running on different computers can communicate and work together.
	A Java-based chat application where multiple clients (running on different systems) connect to a server using sockets.
	A banking system where services like account management, transactions, and reporting are distributed across multiple servers.

Portable - Java can run on any device or OS without modification, as long as JVM is available.

Installation Steps -
--------------------
Download - https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/?utm_source=chatgpt.com#jdk24-windows
An LTS version of Java is a release that will be supported (bug fixes, security updates, performance improvements) by Oracle (and other vendors) for a longer period, typically at least 8 years.
Non-LTS versions (also called feature releases) are supported only for 6 months.

Install - Install the exe or unzip the zip file.
Set the Path
 	Set Environment Variables (Windows)
	JAVA_HOME → path to JDK folder (e.g., C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-21).
	Edit Path variable → add %JAVA_HOME%\bin.
Verify Installation

Running a Java Program - 
-------------------------
1. public class HelloWorld

In Java, everything must be inside a class.
Here we declare a class named HelloWorld.
public means this class can be accessed from anywhere.
The file name must match the class name (HelloWorld.java).


2. public static void main(String[] args)
This is the entry point of every Java program.
Let’s break it down:
public → The method is accessible by JVM (Java Virtual Machine) from anywhere.
static → The method belongs to the class, not an object. JVM can call it without creating an object.
void → The method does not return any value.
main → The name of the method. This is where execution starts.
String[] args → An array of strings, used to take command-line arguments (optional inputs when you run the program).

3.System.out.println("Hello, World!");

System → A built-in Java class.
out → A static object of PrintStream class, representing the standard output (usually console).
println → A method that prints the message and moves to the next line.


------------------------------------

Java Architecture
Java Source Code (.java) → written by the programmer.
Java Compiler (javac) → converts code into Bytecode (.class).
Java Virtual Machine (JVM) → executes bytecode on any platform.
Java Runtime Environment (JRE) → provides libraries + JVM.
Java Development Kit (JDK) → JRE + development tools (compiler, debugger, etc.).


