What is Java:   
   Java is Object Oriented Programming Language.
   Java released in year 1995(James Gosling)
   Write Once, Run anywhere. 

   Java is a High level Language.
      - It abstracts the hardware details  
      - Easy to understand
      - Easy to write
      - Human Understandable. 
      - It requires Compiler to convert code into Machine code. 

  Low Level Language:
     - Machine level Language
  Advantage - It is faster compared to HLL.
     - More Efficient    
   Disdavntages-
       Difficult to read the Code
       More Understanding about the Hardware.

Features Of Java-
  Platform independent - Write Once, Run anywhere.
     Once you compile the java program, you will get a .class file. You take this .class file to any of the operating systems 
that has JDK installed, then if we give the .class file to it, it executes the code.
  Object oriented - Everything in java is treated as object oriented.
  Secure - Dont have direct memory access.
  xyz - 12
  x1yxz - 14
  x2yxz - 20

  add result = xyz + x1yxz

  
  x2yxz = 20
----------------------------
Bank
Manager - update the intrest rates 6 - 10, he can update gold reserve count 1ton, 5tons.
Employee - He cant update intrest rate, he cant update gold reserve
 
  Robust - Strong Memory Management, Exception Handling, Type Checking(Which data type holds what type of data, all the rules have been formulated for this.).

  Simple - Java is easier to learn and also it has syntax similar to c and C++, In Java we use English keywords to write the code, making it easier for developers to develop the code.
  Multithreaded - 
     Task - A task is a set/Group of instructions that performs a particular functionality.
     Thread - A execution Platform for the task.
  Task1, Task2, Task3 .... Task10. 
  Without Multithreading - 1min - 10 tasks - 10mins.
  With Multithreading - all the 10 tasks will get executed in 1min.  
  Before Java21, the threads used to run in Cores, each core can execute a thread. we have different cores available in machines 
ex: Dual Core, Quad Core, Octa Core.
  After Java 21 there is a concept of Virtual Threads. these will run on JVM instead running in core.

  High Performance - Uses JIT(Just in time) compiler for fast executions, in the below ex. the 3 instructions in the loop, it will get repeated, so JIT will create a hotspot and prints the result directly instead of executing the same instructions again.
  
  loop for 10 times
    a = 10
    b = 5
    print a + b;	
  end loop

  Portable - Portabilty means write code in one machine and execute that in any machine(i.e any windows m/c, a Linux M/c, or a Mac m/c ). The criteria here is the machine that executes should have JVM.
  Distributed - Java Supports Networking(java.net) (Ex. Chat Application) and RMI(Remote Method Invocation)
 RMI - You have a program running in machine A and it wants to communicate with a method available in other machine, is possible with RMI.(EJB(Enterprise ), it was deprecated.)
    
 
Installation Steps:
https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/?utm_source=chatgpt.com#jdk24-windows - Down the s/w - Either zip or exe.
Setup Path in environment variables.
Verify the installation by opening CMD prompt and type the command Javac or java --version. this should give the proper result.(you should nort see result something like unknown or unrecognized command.)

Simple Hello World Program-
-----------------------------
1. 
  public class HelloWorld {
     public static void main(String args[]){
        System.out.println("Hello World"); 
    }
  }

public class HelloWorld
  public - The class can be accessed from anywhere.
  class  - All the functionality and data will be wrapped inside a class(in short Everything you write in java should be placed inside a class.)
  HelloWorld - This is name of the class(the class name should match with name of your file.)
  
public static void main(String args[])






